<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8"/>
	<title>The Playground</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/stylesheet.css"/>
</head>
<body>

<p class="titled-section-page-padding"><br /></p>
<div class="titled-section">
<h2 class="bordered-title" id="doc45">THE PLAYGROUND</h2>
<p class="br"><br /></p>

<p><strong>1956-1960</strong></p>

<p><strong>Malin, Oregon</strong></p>

<p>this is a short one. </p>

<p>Recess in grade school was alternately fun and frightening. Usually boys and girls played separately. We played speedball, which was soccer by another name, marbles, tetherball and we ran foot races. All of these activities were both fun and serious. They were the way we established the hierarchy among ourselves, who would be the leaders, who the followers. </p>

<p>I had a reputation for speed, although I was not the fastest in our class. Bruce Bauer could beat me easily, as he could all the others as well. Nobody could touch him. Dale Petrasek, although he was always a bit of a heavy kid, was usually second. I could occasionally beat Dale in a race, but not often. I was third. The three of us were untouchable by the others in the class. The races were straight lines, sprints really, from one end of the dirt playground to the other. We would start with one hand on the brick wall of the schoolhouse and race to an arbitrary line where the playground ended. Then we would line up again and race back, crashing into the brick wall finish line. Sometimes the one male teacher at the grade school would join in and match race slower kids from older grades with faster kids from younger grades. </p>

<p>Speedball was soccer with varying rules. Foot speed was certainly important in speedball, but what you lacked in speed you could make up for with coordination. I was the most coordinated kid in the class. I was the best at controlling the ball with my feet--we called this babying the ball--and when I broke loose with the ball I could outrun almost any defender as I raced toward the goal.</p>

<p>We kept score in two ways when we played speedball. First, we often kept the same teams for multiple days on the playground and would keep a running score of these long games. Second, we kept running totals of goals we had scored as individuals. That was my idea, as there was no one who could really compete with me on that count. The others tried and they kept their totals, but I was always ahead. I remember distinctly when I announced I had just scored my 100th goal. </p>

<p>The combination of being the third fastest in the class and the best speedball player meant I was the leader on the field. It was undisputed. It was the law of the playground, and I was unchallenged. But then, in third grade, Curtis arrived.</p>

<p>Malin was a totally white community in the 1950's. I had no classmates who were not white and I had rarely seen a black person in my life. There were Native Americans (we just called them Indians) from the Klamath tribe in Malin, but none of them were in my class. In the fall, migrant workers came to Malin and lived in &quot;Tent City,” a migrant camp just outside of town, but even these people were white at that time.</p>

<p>So when Curtis came to school and we saw he was black (we called them Negroes, or worse) it was different for us. Curtis was a nice boy, but he challenged me on the playground, not by his attitude, but with his natural abilities.</p>

<p>Curtis joined in the races and he left me in the dust easily. I couldn't believe it. This quiet boy with the shy grin stretched out his legs and flew. I raced him again and again, losing every time. I remember as recess ended and everyone was heading back inside, I was crouched down, one hand on the brick wall of the school and yelling at Curtis &quot;Come on, race me again. Are you chicken?&quot;</p>

<p>It wasn't just the races. Curtis had a natural ability at speedball that combined with his speed made him a formidable opponent. At that time we were playing &quot;no hands&quot; speedball. This rule changed periodically and arbitrarily. When enforced, if you touched the ball with your hands, the other team got a free kick from the point of the foul.</p>

<p>Someone on my team had touched the ball with a hand and the other team chose Curtis to take the free kick. The violation had occurred near our goal, which was at the end of the playground and marked by two trees. I lined my teammates up in front of the goal line to defend. </p>

<p>Curtis studied our defensive line. Then he calmly and easily lofted his free kick over our heads and between the trees for an apparent goal. &quot;Apparent&quot; because I couldn't stand it, and I was the playground leader after all. </p>

<p>&quot;No goal! No goal!&quot; I screamed. Everyone stopped and looked at me. They had to pay attention since I was king of the playground. I knew it and so did they. Curtis needed to learn. </p>

<p>&quot;You can't kick it over our heads,&quot; I explained. This had never been a rule before, but I could make up rules if I was losing, particularly if I was in danger of losing my playground kinghood to a faster runner and better speedball player.</p>

<p>I pulled it off. With the new rule in place, we lined up again and Curtis kicked the ball on the ground. I blocked it with my legs. Curtis never complained. He just played on. </p>

<p>The next day, Curtis wasn't in school. We were finally told he had been burned in an accident at his home. Sometime later he came to school just for a visit. I remember him at the front of the class. His face and hands were scarred from the burns. I felt sorry for him and ashamed of how I had treated him. </p>

<p>Curtis never came back to school. I didn’t have another black classmate until college.</p>

<p>We also played marbles on the playground. When played for keepsies, marbles was a great competitive game. The winner accumulated lots of marbles. To play, you found an opponent and agreed on the conditions. The game required a circle drawn on the ground that was the area of play. Each player scattered an agreed upon number of marbles inside the circle--his dates. The players then took turns using another marble--the shooter--to shoot at the marbles in the circle. If you hit a marble and knocked it out of the circle, it was yours. If your shooter stayed in the circle, you could shoot again until you either didn't knock a marble out of the circle, or your shooter landed outside the circle. </p>

<p>There were different kinds of marbles. There were the common marbles that were white with varying colors of stripes. These were usually dates since they weren't at all special. Cateyes were quite special. These were clear marbles with designs like flower petals visible inside the marble. Cateyes were much less common and were often used as shooters. Dating cateyes was considered extravagant. There were also clearies or peeries--clear marbles of varying colors. Although unusual, they were not normally used as shooters and were sort of a prime date. Solids were marbles of one color that you couldn't see through. Everyone dated solids since no one wanted them. There were also agates, stone marbles that were uncommon and almost exclusively used as shooters since they were heavy and could knock marbles out of the circle quite effectively.</p>

<p>There were various cheats in marbles, including fansies in which the shooter would draw an arc on the inside of the circle. The shooter would use that as the boundary for shooting, thus getting closer to his target. Fansies was generally considered bad form, although it was often used as a handicap for players whose skill levels were poor.</p>

<p>Each player had his favorite shooter and shooters were given almost mystical qualities. A good shooter could somehow improve the accuracy of its user and would stick way better than any normal marble. Sticking was when the shooter stayed in the circle after knocking out another marble, thus allowing the player to continue his turn. The good players would sometimes challenge another player to date their favorite shooters in a game. This was cocky and only the best got away with it.</p>

<p>I was the best. After losing most of my marbles when I first started playing, I began to practice at home by myself. I soon developed a style of shooting that was accurate and effective. I also found an agate I began to use as a shooter. To shoot, I held the shooter pinned between my thumbnail and the tip of my index finger. I raised my hand a few inches above the ground so I could shoot down at my target. </p>

<p>My hours of practice paid off. I began to accumulate marbles. Every player had his own way of carrying his marbles. I used a cylindrical oatmeal box and I quickly had it better than half full of marbles. This was a lot of marbles. I developed a reputation of dating cateyes since I had so many. I also often gave marbles to boys who had lost most of theirs so I would continue to have opponents.</p>

<p>Mike Croft, and others, used old socks to carry their marbles. They tied the top of the sock in a knot to keep the marbles inside. Socks were a lot easier to carry than my oatmeal box, but I had so many marbles I would have needed to use one of Mom’s nylons for a sock.</p>

<p>One day, Mike and I played marbles on the playground. Mike wasn't a particularly good marble player, but that day he was on fire and I lost time after time. Never a good loser, I got increasingly angry and insisted we play again. But recess was over and Mike said no. I fumed. Mike put his marbles back in his sock, including a lot of mine that he had won, and tied the sock.</p>

<p>Impulsively I reached out and snatched the sock from his hand.</p>

<p>&quot;Grab dates and throwsies!&quot; I screamed in true playground marble language. I swung the sock around and around and then let go. The sock arced high in the air and came down on the roof of the school with a thud and stayed there.</p>

<p>We both stared at it. I knew I was in trouble. Our teacher, Mrs. McHenry, had heard my scream and came over. Mike pointed at his sock of marbles on the roof.</p>

<p>I trudged off to the principal's office with Mike and Mrs. McHenry, where I had to explain what I had done. Mr. Hale, the principal, got a ladder. I remember listening to him lecture me on self-control as he climbed the ladder to retrieve the marbles.</p>

<p>Mike and I were best friends, but we did have a somewhat tumultuous relationship. It was when fighting with Mike on the playground I devised my signature fight move--the head bounce. I remember some fights from childhood, but I don't remember what any of them were about. In this one, Mike and I were fighting at recess and ended up wrestling in the dirt. Mike was a lot bigger than me, but I was quick. Somehow, when we were rolling in the dirt I managed to get on top of Mike. When he tried to roll over to get away I slid up over his shoulder and ended up sitting on the side of his head. I bounced a couple of times and he cried uncle.</p>

<p>I also used this move at home one time when we were having a wrestling tournament (organized by Bob, of course). Everyone expected the matches to go to form--the older would beat the younger just by virtue of size and strength. When I wrestled Tom, I pulled the upset of the day by using the head bounce and forcing Tom to give up. I tried to use the head bounce a few times after that, but never successfully. </p>

<p>Mike was also the one who taught me the &quot;nastiest cuss word in the world.&quot; He asked me if I wanted to know what it was.</p>

<p>&quot;Tell me,&quot; I said eagerly.</p>

<p>&quot;Fuck,&quot; he said.</p>

<p>I had never heard it before and felt I had been ushered into a secret society. </p>

<p>&quot;What does it mean?&quot; I asked in all innocence.</p>

<p>He explained to me that it was what your dad did to your mom at night.</p>

<p>Then why was it the nastiest word in the world? I wondered, but I didn't say anything.</p>

<p>We also played tetherball at recess, but I never really got into that. Tetherball was, after all, a girl's game.</p>

<p>In the winter it was often too cold or snowy to play outside on the playground. We played in the gym instead. The portion of the building that housed the gym served three purposes. First, it was a gym where we played basketball and dodgeball. Second, one end of the gym was a stage for plays and musical performances. The stage could be closed off with curtains. During performances, folding chairs were set up on the gym floor. Third, at lunch time, the stage had cafeteria tables set up. Both the grade school and high school kids ate lunch there.</p>

<p>This provided the perfect venue for the basketball heroics of Little Brown. </p>

<p>Mr. Lindauer, the fifth grade teacher, organized an intramural basketball league for the grade school boys. Girls didn't get to play sports--they were girls, after all. To make the teams fair, Mr. Lindauer chose the best five athletes to be team captains and the captains then chose up teams. Of course I was a captain and I fully expected to win the championship. </p>

<p>When we chose teams, I knew each time my turn came around who I wanted next. I was aware of each boy’s strengths and weaknesses. For my last choice, I chose Raymond, one of two mentally retarded boys in the grade school. </p>

<p>There were three mentally retarded people in Malin. They were accepted as part of life in the community. There uniqueness was tolerated well. It was assumed they would be watched over. This didn't mean that they weren't teased in school, but I don't remember the teasing being particularly mean. I didn't participate in this kind of teasing although I did nothing to stop it. It didn't seem fair to me that these boys were so different and I wanted to help them.</p>

<p>With Raymond, I remember making a point of giving him a chance to play in basketball games. I would throw him the ball, although it often just bounced off his forehead, and I was happy when he finally scored.</p>

<p>Mr. Lindauer told us to organize our teams and decide on team names. Since I was the captain, I figured I got to decide the team name. I didn't even ask anyone else. While other teams voted and took mundane names like Celtics and Steelers, I named our team the Silver Eagles by royal decree.</p>

<p>I could be a dominant basketball player in grade school because I had a combination of speed and quickness and I could shoot. We played our league games in the grade school gym at noon recess. This was the same time the kids from the high school (grades 7-12) were having lunch at the cafeteria tables on the stage at one end of the gym. Mr. Lindauer opened the stage curtains while we played and the high school kids watched.</p>

<p>I was a show-off by nature and I loved this exposure. When I had an audience I played harder and tried to make more spectacular plays. I overheard some of the high school boys say &quot;That's Little Brown.&quot; I was proud.</p>

<p>The Silver Eagles won each game and were at the top of the league standings that Mr. Lindauer posted each week. We also kept our own tally of points we scored. I was at the top of that list as well. When the regular season came to a close the Silver Eagles were on top, followed closely by Neil Kniskern's Steelers. We would play in the championship.</p>

<p>It was a formality--or so I thought. The Steelers were, as their name suggests, blue collar players with little finesse and I knew we could handle them easily. We had defeated them in league play. But the day we played, with all the high school kids watching and the championship on the line was not the Silver Eagles' day. I missed easy shots and lost the ball while dribbling. It was a nightmare. When it was over the Steelers were the champs. I hung my head and tried not to cry.</p>

<p>Although it was not a playground activity, I remember catching and preserving flies in seventh grade. At first, I caught the flies in my hands. The flies were everywhere in the schoolrooms and would land on my desk. Slowly and silently I opened my hand and stretched out my arm. Then I quickly swept my cupped hand toward the fly and closed my fist around it. When I caught one, I felt it buzzing in my hand.</p>

<p>I squeezed just a little and the buzzing stopped. Then I took the fly and carefully placed him between two pages of notebook paper and smashed him flat. This created a smear of black, red and yellow goo. We had a competition to see who could catch the most flies. </p>

<p>We quickly moved from using our hands to nab them to using strings of rubber bands tied together. I used two rubber band methods. In the first, I would hold one end of the rubber band between thumb and forefinger of my left hand, stretch the rubber band with my right hand and release it to snap out at the fly on the wall or window. I held on to the rubber band with my left hand so it didn't fly off. This method was effective if I could get close to the fly. For more distant targets, I would loop one end of the rubber band around my left forefinger, stretch it out with my right hand, and shoot it toward the fly. The first method was a bit messier since the flies were hit much harder and often left smears. The second method tended to stun them. They had to be captured before they recovered and took off. </p>

<p>I remember one time in algebra class when I got up to sharpen my pencil. Returning from the pencil sharpener, I heard a buzzing sound and saw a bumblebee flying about the room. As the bee came near me, I took my stance. Using my pencil as a bat, I swung at the bee. The pencil eraser connected solidly with his fat body. He tumbled to the ground still buzzing in a circle where I crushed him mercilessly with my foot. Everyone was amazed.</p>
</div>

</body>
</html>
